# Static Web Approach to Library Website Development

## Deciding Against Using a Content Management System

For many years, the University of Idaho Library website was built using an idiosyncratic PHP-based workflow. At their most efficient, technical tools reflect the cultural needs of the organization. Here, this workflow was effective for the needs of a lone developer, the Digital Initiatives Librarian (now Head, Data and Digital Services), who completed most editing and maintenance of the site as a team of one. He used a series of HTML templates with PHP includes to create each page. The PHP includes pulled in page elements such as headers, navigation, and footers to ensure the overall theme remained consistent across the site. Although some content was pre-generated from XML data using XSLT, most of the content was manually maintained by editing the HTML files. The full assets of the website were duplicated on a test and production server with PHP installed. All development, testing and backing up was done on the test server that was only accessible to select computers in the library offices, limiting the ability to work remotely or test the site with larger groups.

Although this type of home-grown PHP framework is not unique for generating library websites (Northrup, Cherry, and Darby 2017), it can become cumbersome to maintain at scale and difficult to bring in collaborators with different levels of expertise. Instead, it is far more common for libraries to create websites using a Content Management System (CMS). Research on academic libraries' websites by Connell (2013) revealed that 64% of academic libraries surveyed were using CMS such as Drupal, WordPress, or LibGuides, most often the same platform used by their parent institution. A scan of the fourteen public university libraries in the Orbis Cascade Alliance, University of Idaho's regional academic library consortium, completed in January 2020, demonstrated that this trend has continued. Of the fourteen, 85% use an identifiable CMS (five Drupal, five WordPress, two others), with eight using the same platform as their university, two an older version of the platform, and only four establishing something different (Williamson 2020).

The major CMS platforms such as WordPress and Drupal are complex software that utilize a server-side programming language and database to generate a web-based administrative interface and public facing website. They can offer powerful functionality out of the box including nuanced user management, ecosystems of plugins to add features, and professional themes. For large organizations, a CMS's ability to establish minute controls over user rights---delegating roles between content editors, web designers, and ITS maintainers---is often especially important. Once established and properly configured, a CMS can enable non-expert users without HTML or CSS skills to rapidly create and edit web content. These upsides have encouraged adoption throughout the last decade and can transform content creation in the context of a library website (Hubble, Murphy, and Perry 2011; Buell and Sandford 2018).

CMS-based functionality, however, comes with high infrastructure costs, requiring powerful servers for their performance, expert developers for their configurations, and IT professionals to maintain system coherence and security over time. Migration from one major version to the next is never trivial, and even routine maintenance necessary to ensure basic site security requires sophisticated, system-specific knowledge to perform and troubleshoot. Role creation and user management can lead to inefficiencies and frictions in workflows with the continual need for role upkeep and assignment. As Yeh et al.'s (2016) research articulates, these common challenges and need for expert support often catch adopters off-guard. In terms of library websites, a CMS may facilitate content creation, but the IT requirements often mean a library must give up significant control of its web pages in order to adopt the university's platform.

For example, the University of Idaho Library has been offered (and declined) the use of the university's proprietary CMS Sitecore, which is managed by the University\'s web communications unit. Like other CMS products, Sitecore offers the ability to centralize design, branding, and architecture while allowing users from across the university to publish their own content. The result is a coherent, well-branded website, but little of the webpage themes or functionality can be customized by individual units. While the library's web team acknowledges how important it is to mirror the familiar look and feel of the university sites to ensure an uninterrupted experience for users, the library's website requires more flexibility and agility than the CMS offers. The library's site content and functionality are continuously evolving, reflecting researchers\' ever-changing needs to efficiently connect with diverse resources and services.

This independent position offers freedom and opportunity in managing library web properties, but it also requires greater responsibility. In response, the librarians at the core of the web team have developed a pragmatic approach that makes the most of in-house expertise, minimizes infrastructure needs, and respects the unique values of the library, all while ensuring a high-quality experience for users.

## Developing a Static Web Approach

To make building and collaborating on a large website possible without a CMS platform, University of Idaho librarians use a modern static web approach powered by the static generator Jekyll and the version control platform GitHub. Static website generators are tools that transform a folder of structured source code into a complete website, building each page as a static asset. The generator works by iterating over source files containing the content, templates, configuration options, and data to build out the HTML, CSS, and JS that make up a website. These generated files can then be copied onto a minimal web server. The static site generator pre-builds all the pages a user might encounter, in contrast to dynamic web CMS platforms that render each page on-the-fly using a database and server-side processing.

Static web generators have experienced a renaissance since around 2015, emerging as a viable alternative for projects of any size due to their simplicity and performance (Biilmann 2015). Combining the power of themes found in CMS with the pure customization of straight HTML, static site generators trade the GUI ease of the CMS platforms for minimal simplicity that provides a more fundamental level of control and the ability to use data to drive content creation. The web infrastructure is simplified, which lowers the IT barriers that databases and server requirements often impose. At the same time, users interface with the system at a lower level, increasing the difficulty of their initial learning process, but also opening greater opportunities to fully understand the technologies driving the site.

Part of the recent appeal of static generators is driven in response to changing user behavior. As smartphones and mobile data became the norm, user expectations for websites shifted significantly, requiring both responsive designs that function on any size screen and efficient delivery of content at slow connection speeds. Even on the University of Idaho Library website, which features mostly research-related tasks, mobile users continue to steadily rise, from approximately 19% in 2017 to 27% in fall semester 2019 (based on Google Analytics), and bandwidth is a significant concern in a rural state like Idaho. Since static site generators pre-build every page as a static file rather than relying on the server-side processing of CMS, they can provide extremely fast performance, even hosted on the most basic web servers.

## Choosing Jekyll as a Static Web Generator

University of Idaho librarians evaluated a wide variety of static site generators, eventually settling on Jekyll for a variety of reasons. First, Jekyll is set up so it supports a simple mental model of how the site will be built that matches up with traditional web development approaches. Static assets in a folder in the source code will become static assets in the same location on the built-out site. Content is represented by stub files that are assigned a layout that pulls together the modular template elements of each web page. This arrangement is similar to the library's earlier templates of PHP includes, built into a tool that makes the approach considerably more powerful and sustainable. University of Idaho librarians' experiences teaching others during classes, workshops, and internal sessions suggest that the biggest barrier to getting started with Jekyll is setting up the development environment, including Ruby, the programming language necessary to run it. Once past that initial hurdle, learners without a development background are able to understand how the tool works and web pages are constructed. In contrast, some of the major alternatives, such as Hugo, GatsbyJS, and Next.JS, seem to rely on a more formal computational mental model for constructing sites, making them amenable to JavaScript developers, but less intuitive to an average librarian.

Second, Liquid, the templating language used by Jekyll, is powerful yet easy to learn, opening new possibilities for driving content generation from simple data formats such as CSV. This ability to use data created and edited in spreadsheet formats, allows rethinking much of the website content as re-usable chunks added into pages using flexible templates. Spreadsheets are something library folks have plenty of experience with, providing an easy entry point for collaborators to create, organize, and maintain content on the site.

Finally, Jekyll has become the most popular out of the myriad of emerging static generators. This is in part due to being integrated into GitHub\'s free web hosting service, GitHub Pages, making it an attractive option for quick projects and learning opportunities. The vibrant community around these tools results in better support when encountering issues and a wide ecosystem of quality examples to draw from.

On the surface, "popularity" might seem like a shallow metric to consider when selecting tools, but it has become a significant factor when evaluating the sustainability and usability of different technology choices. In the library's context, ready availability of quality documentation and help resources can lower the barriers for learning and use. Additionally, tools such as Jekyll, Bootstrap, and GitHub have huge novice user communities that ask questions and post answers across the web. A quick, specific search will almost always return solutions that are comprehensible to non-computer scientists for any issue one encounters. This accessibility of help resources and a community of users is essential to fostering a library-centric approach as well as keeping the workflow \"do-able\" for University of Idaho librarians and, the authors argue, for librarians generally.

## Using Version Control for Better Site Maintenance and Collaboration

Jekyll's connection to GitHub also led to an important improvement in the library's collaborative development practices: the establishment of a version control system and platform. Previous \"version control\" was manual, i.e., versions were communicated via a series of filenames like index_new.html, index_new-edited.html, and index_better-new-edited.html. This is obviously very prone to error and confusion, leading to an ever-growing maze of filenames and folders. To better manage the history of development (and the Digital Infrastructure Librarian's workload), the library began using the distributed version control system Git with the platform GitHub to host source code repositories. University of Idaho librarians were also attracted to using GitHub because of its emphasis on open code and content sharing, factors that make GitHub popular with librarians at other institutions as well (Davis 2015; Eaton 2018).

When using Git on a project, each set of changes is stored in the repository history as a "commit," like a series of snapshots permanently recording who, what, when, and why. Git also provides the capability of branching and merging, creating an independent copy of the code that can be modified then intelligently re-combined. These features enable collaboration, allowing users to bravely test out new ideas and features without disrupting the current working version or fear losing code.

GitHub provides additional web-based features to facilitate collaboration, which help team members visualize each other's work, track projects, and have conversations directly within the code. By making the team's work visible, GitHub allows the group to better understand what everyone is doing and move forward on the project simultaneously. Finally, the code is available anywhere, allowing collaborators to work outside of office desktops. While a variety of alternative platforms exist, such as Bitbucket and Gitlab or even self-hosted solutions, GitHub seemed to have the most usable web interface, friendly documentation, and largest community, making it an extremely popular repository service and obvious choice for the library's needs.

## Building a Template for the Redesign

Several requirements guided the overall project design for the new library web template. The new site needed to:

-   follow the University\'s updated branding guideline for logos, colors, and fonts;
-   echo the main university website\'s look and feel, while maintaining the old library website\'s unique features, functionality, and structure;
-   preserve page locations to avoid broken links;
-   and improve responsive design to ensure better usability on all devices.

To build the new template the library web team evaluated a variety of CSS and JS frameworks, which facilitate quick development by providing standardized design components, classes, and functions. The old site used an out-of-date version of Bootstrap 3 with extensive customization and inline styles that made it difficult to maintain. Since Bootstrap continues to be perhaps the most popular framework on the web, the web team decided to update to the most recent version (4.x) and remove the old customizations to ensure simpler maintenance going forward.

Next, the Digital Infrastructure Librarian set up a skeleton structure for the Jekyll project. Using the affordances of the generator, he aimed to create a clear separation of content and design template elements. This not only simplifies maintenance but enables a lower barrier to contributions from collaborators with different skills and expertise. Rather than individual documents, the content is envisioned as data that could be migrated into a variety of templates or platforms, or transformed in bulk, making it future and preservation ready. Additionally, numerous pages presented content in repeating elements on the page such as cards, accordions, or tables. These repeating chunks in the documents can be better represented as tabular data, thus he aimed to move this content into spreadsheets.

Migrating content from the old site was more complex than expected, since the server contained hundreds of files that were no longer in use but lingered for historical reasons. To parse this maze, the Digital Infrastructure Librarian used a web crawler to traverse the website creating a list of pages that were discoverable and active. Using this data, he carried out bulk content migration using Python. Content from each active page was extracted out of the old template by parsing the HTML, cleaned using regular expressions, then exported to a new stub file with the correct format for the Jekyll-based redesign project. This created a raw base for the content, which would need further editing and auditing to ensure everything was up to date.

With the base project source code hosted on GitHub, the initial team of two librarians worked through quick iterations to create the new design, rapidly testing features and styles using Jekyll\'s built-in development server. Using GitHub Pages hosting, the draft version was published on the live web so it could be reviewed by others and tested on a variety of devices while still in continually active development. Getting feedback early and often is a central feature of an agile approach that helps efficiently direct development efforts. At this point the team of two was about to get bigger, putting the new communication and collaboration workflow to the test.
