# Effects on Collaboration

## Cross-departmental Development using Agile-inspired Development Principles

As the redesign process ramped up, the Head of Data and Digital Services (DDS) department issued an open call to all library employees to join the Library's annual Web Committee meetings, hoping to gain new members and include as many people as possible in the process, due to the large scope of work to be accomplished. Traditionally, the University of Idaho Library does no large revisions to its website during the academic year, believing that consistency is important for efficient use of the site. This means most of the major revisions and new features are developed over the summer months when the Library's Web Committee meets and works. Library Web Committee members typically gather feedback and input, open channels of communication, and form working groups to take on new web projects.

For a year prior to the redesign, the DDS department had been experimenting with using Agile-inspired development sprints (https://agilemanifesto.org/) to help improve departmental products, communication, and workflows. That experience, combined with the many constraints presented during the redesign project, led to the initiation of a similar process for the entire Library Web Committee to facilitate the development of the website template and complete migrating the content. Following the Agile sprint model, the committee met every day for two weeks for 15 to 30 minutes in the morning and afternoon. Small groups were assigned specific tasks, and committee members were constantly consulted about the new designs and features being developed each day. Some of the technical work could be accomplished only by the two primary developers but participants of varying skill levels helped with content evaluation and revision, and the editing and migration of some content from the former pages into the new repository.

The informal sprint structure of the process, and iterative development model, allowed many staff and faculty members to provide input on the look and feel of the site as it came into being. The developers were particularly happy to see two reference and instruction librarians, the Science Librarian and Social Sciences Librarian, emerge as leaders in the redesign process. Incorporating public services librarians is integral to any library website redesign for several reasons. First, the website is often students' first interaction with the library and sometimes their only interaction. Since instruction librarians interact regularly with students in both the classroom and the reference desk, they are well suited to identify issues students will likely encounter navigating the website. Because librarians are skilled at the research process and understand a different set of terminology (like resources, services, and collections) than users, this presents a unique challenge to make the website intuitive. Second, involving more library departments in the design of the website creates buy-in and understanding of website development processes. This makes continual improvement and iteration of the website more feasible (Vassiliadis and Stimatz 2002).

The Science Librarian and Social Sciences Librarian made recommendations for changes to the library's homepage to address issues they and other reference and instruction librarians encountered regularly at the reference desk amongst users. After these initial changes were incorporated into the website redesign, they were then able to take the first iteration of the new website to a new sample audience, running an abbreviated user testing program among typical users, students, and faculty.

## Using Student Focus Groups to Gather Feedback

Once the collaborative sprint was completed and the new Library site was prototyped, the Science Librarian and Social Sciences Librarian organized basic user testing focus groups composed of student employees who worked at the circulation desk. Most were upperclassmen who had worked at the library for a few years and therefore not only had experience with the website as students but also in helping patrons utilize it. Pulling focus group participants from the pool of student employees made user testing quick and easy, as they were already in the library and being compensated for their time. The Science Librarian and Social Sciences Librarian sat down with these students to talk about how they used the website and what they wanted to see in the updated version. There were two focus group sessions, each with three student employees. The two librarians first brought up the website as it was and asked them what they thought the main function of the website was, how they found a book, what common questions they got from students and community members about the website, and what frustrations they had with the current website. Their responses detailed some of their frustration with what department phone numbers were available and where, a desire for the library hours to be in a more prominent location, and requests for the events calendar and the Quicklinks to useful resources to be better highlighted. The students had many thoughts on the old website's design and functionality, ranging from resigned acceptance to commenting that it was "kinda cringey."

The Science Librarian and Social Sciences Librarian then showed the students the updated website and asked about their general impressions, what else they would like to see on the homepage, what caught their eye, how they would navigate the website, and how well the mobile platform worked. The students were very enthusiastic that the new library website design resembled that of the university's main website. This not only kept it in brand but also made it more intuitive for students, who had already learned to navigate the university's site. They liked the consistency in having all buttons be links, the arrangement of items and use of photos, and the prominence of the catalog search bar. One student commented, "Even if this is the final version of the new website, I like it a million times more than the old site."

While these focus groups were helpful in polishing the redesigned site, there was also further value in learning about knowledge gaps of the student employees during this process. Some did not know what a subject liaison was or had never encountered some of the library's more popular databases. This information was useful in designing training for student employees and understanding where knowledge gaps are for students when in instruction or reference situations.

## Website Release and Responding to Initial Feedback

Once all the content was edited, the markup formatted to match Bootstrap 4 framework requirements, and the architecture restructured, the new site was built and moved onto the library's server to go live. At this point, the site was functional for University of Idaho students' and researchers' needs, but there were still smaller projects the team wanted to work on improving over time including gathering wider community feedback on the changes.

To gather community feedback, the Library's Web Committee created a brief, six question Qualtrics survey that was linked to within the initial carousel slide on the library's updated homepage. Within this survey, the committee asked respondents how often they visited the library's website, whether or not they found what they were looking for on the day they responded to the survey, and if anything was confusing or difficult to use on the new website. The committee also included an open-ended question for additional comments. In the span of 7 weeks, the library received 16 responses; 12 of these indicated that they visited the library's website at least a few times a week and, in some cases, almost every day. Overall, respondents indicated that they found what they were looking for on the newly designed website, but six stated that they could not. When prompted for more information, respondents shared that they could not locate a specific database, two specific journals, or a link to Interlibrary Loan (ILL). When comparing the newly designed website (figure 3) to its prior iteration (figure 4), these comments make sense. In the prior iteration, the Library website included links to "Popular" resources, links to find specific types of information, and a link to ILL directly below the catalog search box. These three links were still accessible from the library homepage, but they had been moved to a new Menu navigation box with no obvious signposting.

Figure 3. University of Idaho Library website search box, 8/15/2018.

Figure 4. University of Idaho Library website search box, 4/8/2018.

The Library Web Committee also presented the initial website redesign to library faculty and staff across departments for their assessment and found that their feedback on the site's new features mirrored the respondents' feedback from the Qualtrics user survey. Participants in both groups disliked that the search box on the redesigned site now directed visitors to only physical items instead of all the library's physical and electronic holdings and missed having an easy link to Interlibrary Loan situated underneath the search box. Based on this input, the Web Committee released a new version of the library's homepage that incorporated these changes: a link to Interlibrary Loan was added to the "More Research Tools" section below the search box, and visitors searching the catalog would see both physical and electronic results related to their search (figure 5).

Figure 5. University of Idaho Library website search box, 12/15/2018.

## Collaborative Development through the Static Web Approach

The capacity for all of the Library's Web Committee members to gather, test, and implement website design feedback on-the-fly would have been impossible if the library had not migrated from PHP to the static web. Although this migration was challenging for the Library Web Committee and the library, it led to the most successful website redesign to date. Library employees with different skills levels, perspectives, and departmental affiliations were encouraged to share their feedback directly with Library Web Committee members and in open meetings, effectively removing the "us versus them" dichotomy that had dominated prior website work.

The strong channels of communication and collaboration have continued, fostering a greater sense of ownership over web features across the library. This past summer, for instance, reference services meetings discussed the trend of proactive chat boxes to increase engagement with patrons. With her experience on the web redesign, the Science Librarian knew it could be implemented, and sat down with the Digital Infrastructure Librarian to flesh out the concept. In a short time, the feature was deployed throughout the site. This ability to communicate, then rapidly move from idea to concrete prototypes and implementation, is supported by this approach.

Another recent example comes from the development of a "topics of instruction" page that was driven by the library liaisons. The liaisons were interested in marketing the instruction expertise available at the library via the website. A small group of them worked on gathering input regarding expertise via a shared Google Sheet. They also identified possible means of display, noting that the American Library Association's page on future trends (<http://www.ala.org/tools/future/trends> ) was an attractive way of delineating this information. The Liaison to the College of Education, Health, and Human Sciences then met with the Head of Digital and Data Services to collaborate on the project. Through a series of meetings, and then a presentation to the general faculty, the library settled on a page that allows users to filter and search the various areas of expertise (figure 6), learn more about them via modal pop-ups within the page (figure 7), and then request instruction for the topics they desire via a customized Qualtrics survey form.

Figure 6. A portion of the University of Idaho Library Topics of Instruction page, 1/30/2020, <https://www.lib.uidaho.edu/services/instruction/topics.html>

Figure 7. Modal Pop-up for Digital Collections instruction from the University of Idaho Library Topics of Instruction page (1/30/2020). Clicking on the Request Instruction button leads a user to a customized Qualtrics survey form.

To finalize the page, the Liaisons then gathered additional data to better describe the topics listed, via the same Google Sheet. In order to regenerate the page with the new data, the developer downloads the Google spreadsheet as a CSV, replaces the former CSV with that data, then re-builds the site using a Jekyll command, after which he replaces the former page with the revised one. The process demonstrates the agility of this static web approach, as the implementation takes the developer about two minutes while allowing for collaborative content development on a complex web feature using input from librarians across library departments.
