# Discussion

## Benefits and Challenges of the Static Web Approach

The University of Idaho Library's experience implementing a static web approach suggests there are a variety of benefits and unique opportunities in adopting this methodology as an alternative to standard CMS solutions, including minimized infrastructure barriers, project agility, and increased staff collaboration and professional growth.

First, static generators enable simplified infrastructure that requires less technical investment to start and maintain servers and systems. There is no need to configure PHP, update CMS platforms, or maintain a separate staging server with the attendant version control challenges. This also removes significant security risks. The web team had an unfortunate experience where an unused, unpatched WordPress instance was compromised via a plugin that injected advertising into its pages, an incident that made them eager for the peace-of-mind of a fully static server. The minimal hosting requirements allowed a move away from library managed hardware to a basic virtual server managed by central ITS. The static approach enables the library to do more with less IT / sysadmin support, removing technical, budget, and staffing barriers, and refocusing energy on central elements of the site including user experience, site structure, and improved aesthetics.

Second, by focusing on re-usable data and content, this static web approach ensures project agility. This focus stems in part from the web team's experience developing the library's digital collection sites. They saw an opportunity to utilize the data-driven capacities of modern static web to build digital collections sites around spreadsheets of well-crafted metadata and digital objects, both of which can be easily transferred to other platforms in the future.

When it came time to rethink the library website, this focus on data also became the model. Now, the content of the library website is treated as data: many web pages are built from CSVs initially created in Google Sheets, which simplifies updates and collaboration. This approach has been applied to much of the website and is especially useful when building those pages that include repeating chunks of content, such as directories, resource lists, or FAQs. As with the library's digital collections, organizing the site's content as data ensures that it is prepared for inevitable migration or rebranding projects.

The benefits of this site structure, however, extend further than an increased capacity for migration: because both experienced web team members and more novice library users can easily access and edit this content in its data format, changes can be rapidly deployed to respond quickly to feedback and keep the site up to date. The flexibility of this iterative and data-driven development model encourages experimentation and play by the site's developers, lowering the barriers to implementing new ideas and concepts and enabling incremental improvements to the code.

Finally, besides more in-depth collaboration, this model has created opportunities for colleagues to grow new skills relevant to library work that they might not otherwise encounter. A 2016 survey asking librarians "what technology skill would you like to learn to help you do your job better?" found the top two responses were programming and web skills, which they perceived would help them solve issues, communicate better, and bring new tech into the library (Maceli and Burke 2016). Participating in a static web project provides this opportunity, exposing collaborators to the backend of the website and empowering them to make changes as they develop fundamental code and data skills.

One of the major drivers of silos and work division in academic libraries and similar institutions are the systems employed to deliver library services. By opening up the development workflows, code, and data driving the library website development, library personnel from all areas of the library can develop a deeper understanding and strong sense of ownership over the main access point and consumer of all these systems, the library website. At University of Idaho Library, this new approach has fostered a collaborative spirit that has opened cross-departmental channels of communication across the library. Because library staff better understand what is possible for altering website content, the web team now enjoys more efficient and rewarding conversations among everyone invested in the website's efficacy and usefulness. Though the learning curve for editing page content is steeper for a static site than a CMS-based approach, once the foundational skills have been mastered, contributors' return on investment includes increased control and customization of site content and their own private development space in which to learn and practice skills.

## Lib-STATIC, a methodology

The benefits presented here have potential beyond University of Idaho Library's project and local context. They are part of a growing community of library developers exploring the potential of static development approaches for digital scholarship, digital collections, and web projects of all types. This approach is an emerging methodology that offers a viable alternative to the heavy web infrastructure typically employed in libraries, with the potential to fundamentally reshape librarians' relationship to development. To further support this approach and, most importantly, grow a community of practice around it, the authors have termed this methodology "Lib-STATIC," and have created a website that will start gathering resources, recipes, and ideas: <https://lib-static.github.io/> .

At its core, Lib-STATIC recognizes that librarians are fundamentally adept at many of the central needs of online applications---namely metadata/data creation and analysis, content description and classification, and assessment---and seeks to build tools that respect and utilize these skills. Ultimately, this frees librarians from devoting all their time to learning specific proprietary library platforms, allowing them instead to focus their attention on using data and learning web skills that can be applied to lightweight, open source web applications to fit their needs and reflect the unique context and values of the library. This developmental freedom does have its drawbacks as it requires a greater initial investment of time and energy from librarians learning the tools and techniques, as well as an ongoing responsibility to manage code and dependencies outside the comfortable confines of a CMS. For a certain type of library, the approach, however, offers great potential for librarians' and for library websites. To that end, and to help others learn and employ this approach, the Lib-STATIC website will be built out in the immediate future to feature a network of library projects using static web tools, recipes, and solutions for building sites, and documentation to help others get started.
